<!--H2: Chapter 9-->
(ch:9)=
# Inductive reasoning #

*Induction* is a form of reasoning which infers general rules from specific observations. For instance, given the following *Theory*
```Prolog
bird(tweety).            bird(polly).
has_feathers(tweety).    has_beak(polly).
```
we might want to infer a *Hypothesis* explaining why both Tweety and Polly fly:
```Prolog
flies(X):-bird(X)
```
There is a strong similarity between induction and abduction: if the *Examples*, which induction seeks to explain, are the ground facts `flies(tweety)` and `flies(polly)` then the following relation holds:

$$
Theory \cup Hypothesis \models Examples
$$

The main difference with abduction is that *Hypothesis* is allowed to be a set of clauses, rather than a set of ground facts as in abduction.

+++

<!--section 8.3-->
Given this similarity, we will try to adopt the abductive meta-interpreter developed in {numref}`sec:8.3` to perform induction. We assume that the set of possible hypotheses is given by means of the predicate `inducible/1`.
```{swish} 9.0.1
---
source-text-start: op_not
source-text-end: 9.0.1-end
---
```
Whenever a clause is added to the inductive hypothesis, we proceed by constructing an inductive explanation of its body.

+++

Suppose `inducible/1` is defined as follows:
```Prolog
inducible((flies(X):-bird(X),has_feathers(X),has_beak(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-has_feathers(X),has_beak(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-bird(X),has_beak(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-bird(X),has_feathers(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-bird(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-has_feathers(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-has_beak(X))).
inducible((flies(X):-true)).
```
These facts state that every clause with `flies/1` in its head and some of the predicates in *Theory* in its body is a possible inductive hypothesis. We can use `induce/2` to find out which of these clauses account for the fact that Tweety and Polly fly:
```Prolog
?-induce(flies(tweety),H).
H = [(flies(tweety):-bird(tweety),has_feathers(tweety))];
H = [(flies(tweety):-bird(tweety))];
H = [(flies(tweety):-has_feathers(tweety))];
H = [(flies(tweety):-true)];
No more solutions

?-induce(flies(polly),H).
H = [(flies(polly):-bird(polly),has_beak(polly))];
H = [(flies(polly):-bird(polly))];
H = [(flies(polly):-has_beak(polly))];
H = [(flies(polly):-true)];
No more solutions
```
We can combine the answers to these queries in order to find a single clause which explains **both** `flies(tweety)` and `flies(polly)`. One way to do this is by *generalisation*, as will be explained later. Another way is to process all the examples at once.

```{exercise} ex:9.1
```

+++

However, a serious problem with this approach is the impracticality of listing every possible hypothesis by means of the predicate `inducible/1`. In general, the inductive hypothesis can consist of several clauses, and might be recursive. The *hypothesis space* of possible sets of clauses is typically very large, and even infinite when functors are involved. This space needs to be searched in a systematic manner. Another complication is the possibility of *overgeneralisations* like the clause `flies(X):-true`. In order to prevent overgeneralisation, *negative examples* need to be included in the induction process (here: non-flying objects). For these reasons, induction requires a more sophisticated search strategy than abduction. We will take a closer look at the structure of the search space in the next section. Then, we will develop two programs that can induce definitions for predicates like `append/3` from examples.
