<!--H3: Section-->
# Further reading #

The program `induce_rlgg/2` is based on the GOLEM system described in (Muggleton & Feng, 1990). The program `induce_spec/2` is based on the MIS system described in (Shapiro, 1983). (Quinlan, 1990) discusses a hill-climbing heuristic for top-down induction. The notion of generalisation in logic programs is discussed in (Niblett, 1988). (Gottlob, 1987) precisely characterises the difference between $\theta$-subsumption and logical consequence.

The subject of inductively inferring logic programs has been recently named *Inductive Logic Programming*. (Muggleton, 1992) is the first collection of papers on this subject. Recent books are (De Raedt, 1992) and (Lavra&#269; & D&#382;eroski, 1994).

* G. Gottlob (1987), 'Subsumption and implication', *Information Processing Letters* **24**: 109--111.
* N. Lavra&#269; & S. D&#382;eroski (1994), *Inductive Logic Programming: Techniques and Applications*, Ellis Horwood.
* S.H. Muggleton & C. Feng (1990), 'Efficient induction of logic programs'. In *Proc. First Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory*, Ohmsha, Tokyo. Also in (Muggleton, 1992), pp. 261-280.
* S.H. Muggleton (ed.) (1992), *Inductive Logic Programming*, Academic Press.
* T. Niblett (1988), 'A study of generalisation in logic programs'. In *Proc. European Working Sessions on Learning*, D. Sleeman (ed.), pp. 131-138, Pitman.
* J.R. Quinlan (1990), 'Learning logical definitions from relations', *Machine Learning* **5** (3): 239-266.
* L. De Raedt (1992), *Interactive Theory Revision: an Inductive Logic Programming Approach*, Academic Press.
* E.Y. Shapiro (1983), *Algorithmic Program Debugging*, MIT Press.
