---
resource: text
id: 1.1.0_1
type: long
---

Our Universe of Discourse in this chapter will be the London Underground, of which a small part is shown in fig. 1.1. Note that this picture contains a wealth of information, about lines, stations, transit between lines, relative distance, etc. We will try to capture this information in logical statements. Basically, fig. 1.1 specifies which stations are directly connected by which lines. If we follow the lines from left to right (Northern downwards), we come up with the following 11 formulas:

{{ code['1.0.1'] }}

Let&rsquo;s define two stations to be *nearby* if they are on the same line, with at most one station in between. This relation can also be represented by a set of logical formulas:

{{ code['1.0.2'] }}

{{ figure['1.1'] }}

These 16 formulas have been derived from the previous 11 formulas in a systematic way. If *X* and *Y* are directly connected via some line *L*, then *X* and *Y* are nearby. Alternatively, if there is some *Z* in between, such that *X* and *Z* are directly connected via *L*, and *Z* and *Y* are also directly connected via *L*, then *X* and *Y* are also nearby. We can formulate this in logic as follows:

{{ code['1.0.3'] }}

In these formulas, the symbol &lsquo; `:-` &rsquo; should be read as &lsquo;if&rsquo;, and the comma between `connected(X,Z,L)` and `connected(Z,Y,L)` should be read as &lsquo;and&rsquo;. The uppercase letters stand for universally quantified variables, such that, for instance, the second formula means:

> **For any values** of *X*, *Y*, *Z* and *L*, *X* is nearby *Y* **if** *X* is directly connected to Z via L, **and** Z is directly connected to Y via L.
