### Further reading ###

There are many introductory and advanced textbooks on Prolog programming. (Bratko, 1990) is a particularly practical introduction. (Sterling & Shapiro, 1986) offers a slightly more advanced presentation. (Nilsson & Maluszynski, 1990) is one of the few books dealing with both the theoretical and practical aspects of programming in Prolog. (Ross, 1989) and (O&rsquo;Keefe, 1990) discuss advanced issues in the practice of Prolog programming.

Those eager to learn more about the implementation of Prolog interpreters are referred to (Maier & Warren, 1988). (Bowen & Kowalski, 1982) is an early source on meta-programs in Logic Programming. The slogan Algorithm = Logic + Control was put forward by Kowalski (1979). A discussion of the relation between declarative and procedural programming can be found in (Kowalski, 1993).

* K.A. Bowen & R.A. Kowalski (1982), &lsquo;Amalgamating language and metalanguage in Logic Programming&rsquo;. In *Logic Programming*, K.L. Clark & S. T&auml;rnlund (eds.), Academic Press.
* I. Bratko (1990), *Prolog Programming for Artificial Intelligence*, Addison-Wesley, second edition.
* R.A. Kowalski (1979), &lsquo;Algorithm = Logic + Control&rsquo;, *Communications of the ACM* **22** (7): 424-436.
* R.A. Kowalski (1993), &lsquo;Logic Programming&rsquo;. In *Encyclopedia of Computer Science*, A. Ralston & E.D. Reilly (eds), pp. 778-783, Van Nostrand Reinhold, third edition.
* D. Maier & D.S. Warren (1988), *Computing with Logic: Logic Programming with Prolog*, Benjamin/Cummings.
* U. Nilsson & J. Maluszynski (1990), *Logic, Programming and Prolog*, John Wiley.
* R.A. O&rsquo;Keefe (1990), *The Craft of Prolog*, MIT Press.
* P. Ross (1989), *Advanced Prolog: Techniques and Examples*, Addison-Wesley.
* L.S. Sterling & E.Y. Shapiro (1986), *The Art of Prolog*, MIT Press.
